#Version 3: I got really excited, in `make_pi_3.c`

Okay, I couldn't wait, so I found an external library that provides enhanced precision calculation.  It's actually really cool, because you can use as many digits as you'd like.  The only real downside is that it runs WAY slower.  Like, orders of magnitude slower (as in 100x, 1000x, etc.).  But, it definitely does what it advertises!  Using 10,000,000 iterations, I can successfully get beyond the 12-digit limit of normal number storage.  Unfortunately, it takes over 2 minutes, compared to the less than 2 seconds of the normal version.  

Even more unfortunate is that the library only runs on Unix/Linux, which means I probably shouldn't leave it running overnight (I doubt the school's server administrators would like that).  I was actually surprised how easily I learned how to use it and got it compiled, considering that it's a huge general-purpose multiple-precision arithmetic library.  Besides all the new dependencies when compiling, and the fact that I added a new command-line argument to specify how many bits of precision to use in the internal calculations, the only real difference is now that the arithmetic no longer actually looks like arithmetic.  

Something we usually take for granted when doing all these mathematical operations is that they use operators like + and \* as shorthand for applying some formal operation to two arguments.  This library (the GNU Multiple Precision library, to be specific, found at http://gmplib.org) can't overload operators in C, so it just creates a bunch of C-language functions and requires the two operators as arguments (as well as the destination for the result).  This means we can no longer have a long equation where the results of one operation are automatically passed as the operator to the next operation, and instead we just have a long list of function calls.  This means we have a little more explicit use of temporary variables as storage for those intermediate operands, but otherwise, the code is now completely unlimited, save for how much time you can spend actually cranking out these numbers.  If 13 digits take 2 minutes (that's 10,000,000 iterations), well, good luck getting much more...
